 Bijlage  1 Format for  Information  Collection   -    Results Report 2009-2010 (bilateral aid program) Embassy (for delegated aid):   Maputo Country:   Mozambique Strategic Goal :  Contribute to poverty reduction in  Mozambique  in an aligned and effective way Sub-goal/ programme selected for this form :  Education: The Embassy aims to phase out of the sector,  ultimately by 2011. A dequate and sustained sector funding should be guaranteed through the MTFF process, also reflecting increased GBS Netherlands’ contribution.  This form is c ompleted by :   Mieke   Vogels 1. CONTEXT  a. Country  or regional  context Although the Mozambican economy has nearly doubled in the past 10 years with a sustained average Gross Domestic Growth of 6 ,24 % ,  Mozambique  is still one of the poorest countries of the world. More than half of the population live below the poverty line (Household Budget  Survey - IOF 2008/9).   Mozambique  ranks 165 out of 169 countries in the UN Human Development Index (HDI – UNDP, 2010 ). Yet  Mozambique ’s HDI value has improved notably since the end of the war and the country is among the top 10 improvers since 2000. Of the 20.2 million people more than half (54%) are younger than 18 years. For anyone born in 2007, life expectancy was 49.4 years.  (Population Census 2007).  In the rural areas one third and in the urban areas two thirds of the people have access to safe, clean water (World Development Indicators, 2006). 50.4% of the population cannot read or write. Illiteracy is strongly gender structured: 34.6% of men are illiterate, whereas for women the figure rises to 64.2% (Pop.  Census 2007).   b .  Education  Sector context Mozambique ’s current Five Year Government Plan (PQG) 2010 – 2014 emphasizes the crucial role of education and training to create the necessary human capital for sustained social and economic development .  Priority is given to ensuring opportunities for all children to complete a primary education of seven years.  The current  education sector  strategic  plan ,   priorit ise s  primary education through three main areas of interventions: Increasing access ,   with a special focus on reaching gender parity ,  Improving quality of education   Strengthening institutional capacity   throughout the education system. Resulting from the progress  made in access to primary schooling , secondary education is expanding rapidly, while the call for a more technical-oriented work force is increasing. In the coming years, focus will be on the consolidation of the reforms initiated over the last years in the area of secondary, technical and vocational education, as well as higher education with the aim to make this level of education more responsive to the needs of society for sustainable economic and social development. Gender parity has  practically been  reached with regard to 6 year old children entering Grade 1 . However, the longer children stay in school, the higher the chance for girls to drop out.  The p ercentage of female   s tudents  in higher education is much lower than for  male students  ( female students  occupy  approx imately  30 %   of the available places  in higher education) Until 2009 , the  education  sector programme  was  supported by increased internal and external funding. Government has consistently allocated around 20% of its resource s  to the education sector.  However, t he portion of bilateral donor funding through the common education sector support fund has diminished from 2010 onwards. Through contributions of  FTI  and  a World Bank loan ( total 16 1 million USD for 3 years), contributions are now again at the level of 2009. This poses a serious problem ,  however, because there is not sufficient funding to accommodate  maintenance, let alone  the dramatic growth of the system.  c. Description of the problem As access to primary education has grown dramatically, the system has not been able to ensure sufficient  quality  of outcomes in terms of pupils’ performance. A comparative education quality monitoring study for Southern and Eastern Africa, SACMEQ III, ( http://www.sacmeq.org/sacmeq3.htm )  showed that performance in  reading and mathematics skills for Grade 6 pupils have deteriorated significantly in Mozambique, whereas in all but one (Uganda) other participating countries,  performance remained the same or improved.  In order to improve learning outcomes, g overnment  is advised to  address the design and implementation  of  an  Early Childhood Development policy as well as  in addressing the implementation of a mother tongue language instruction policy throughout the country. There are also challenges in addressing  gender and  geographical equity,  quality and relevance issues in the secondary and  post secondary  education subsectors.   Another serious challenge is that the system has not succeeded to accommodate primary school  leavers in post primary levels of education.  Not only is there lack of physical space in post primary education, there is by far not enough budget available to ensure adequate good quality post primary schooling system. Strategies for post primary education are  in place, but the  adequately trained human resources and financial resources are lacking.   T he number of out of school and unemployed youth is growing which in turn may have a negative impact on social stability , especially in urban areas.   d. Intervention logic A number of donors participate in  the education  sector pooled fund (FASE) which supports the implementation of the education sector  strategic  plan  (ESSP) .  The  Netherlands  has been one of the major  FASE  donors for the past few years  both in terms of financial contribution to FASE (19 million € in 2009, 7 million € in 2010) as well as in terms of participation in policy development dialogue .  However, in  2007, the Embassy decided that it could withdraw from participating in FASE in 2011, because it was expected that the Netherlands contribution to the national  budget (     via the direct budget support mechanism)  would grow substantially and that the education sector support fund FASE would cease to exist as the sector was expected to become fully funded through the overall budget. 2. RESULTS AND LESSONS LEARNED  What was achieved and why?  What made it happen?  Between 2003  and 2010 ,the  number of  children  in primary  schools   increased   from 3,3 million to 5,3 million.  The number of qualified primary school teachers has grown as well. In 2009 the government  recruited  9.400  new teachers and in 2010 again  9.800 new teachers were  recruited. In 2011 yet another 12.000 new teachers were  employed .  T he ministry has  also  managed to ensure the  availability    of  free textbooks for all the children in primary schools. Increased funding from internal sources and external sources has made this substantial growth possible.  What went less well and why? I mproving  educational  quality  and a sufficient   expansion  and strengthening  of  the post primary levels  did not go well .  An important reason for this is the fact that attention of policy makers has been too much focused on performance related to Millennium Development Goal 2 (reaching universal primary education by 2015) which resulted in less attention to quality in primary education and to planning for establishing an adequate post primary system. What has been learned? The policy dialogue should have focused seriously on  overall  educational quality and post-primary education long ago.  Long term inclusive planning would have indicated that problems which we are facing today, would occur and could then have been dealt with in a  more timely  manner. Also, discussions on education sector financing should have been done more openly amongst all donors and with involvement of the line Ministry and the Ministries of Planning and Finance in order to identify the financing gaps in an early stage. Last but not least, the Netherlands Embassy should have discussed her plan to withdraw from sector financing in a dialogue with other donors and the government, before taking the decision. This was now done in isolation and compensation for our withdrawal did not occur in a properly designed way.  Apart from the  Netherlands ,  Denmark  decided in 2010 to withdraw from the education sector. This decision was communicated to other donors without prior consultation or discussion. 3. RESOURCES SPENT (ODA and FTEs) Dutch ODA disbursed during 2009-2010 as contribution to this strategic goal  (approximately)   €  27.000.000 Average a mount of Embassy FTEs allocated  during 2009 and 2010  to this goal (for delegated aid)   0,75 FTE Piramide  numbers of relevant Activities 14419 4. OVERALL TRAFFIC LIGHT SCORE The overall achievement of results is:  ( Please tick   √ )   Off-track    1 v     In danger to be off track  2    O n track  3