 Results Report 2009-2010 (bilateral aid program) Embassy (for delegated aid): Addis Ababa Thematic Department (for non-delegated aid):  Country: Ethiopia Strategic Goal: food security and agricultural growth Sub-goal/ programme selected for this form (where relevant):   environment, PSD This form is completed by:  G errit  N oordam  and Gerrit Westenbrink 1. CONTEXT  a. Country or regional context and b. Sector (or thematic) context The context, the Horn of Africa,   in  which Ethiopia is situated is characterized by various types of insecurity with different causes. Food insecurity in Ethiopia has been persistent and  of a  large scale over many decades. During  the  last decade the Government  of Ethiopia  (GoE) developed a consistent policy for alleviating poverty and eliminating food insufficiency  and stimulating economic growth in the private sector .  In the new Growth and Transformation  P lan  (2010-2015)  very high am bitions have been included,  both in term of food  secu r it y and in ‘agricul t ure as  an  engine  for  economic growth ’ . Ethiopia now  has three  major multi-donor programmes in place :   the  P roductive Safety Net Programme (SLMP), Sustainable Land Management Programme (SLMP) and  the  Agriculture Growth  Programme (AGP).   T he first focuss es  on  vulnerable  food insecure areas , the second on restoring and improving natural resource management, and the third works on  boosting surplus production and marketing in  high potential  areas .   c. Description of the problem Food insecurity has caused a vicious circle in development efforts for many years ,  including the over -emphasis on  emergency -related activities .  This led to a (general) dependency attitude and a relative neglect of investments in  agricultural growth  and P rivate  S ector  D evelopment . With the change in policy, most significantly since 2005, and a new ambitious GTP, the challenge is to reverse the  deficiencies  and threats into sustainable production and growth.  Output of agriculture is increased and new export commodities like flowers , fruits  and vegetables  and oilseeds  have shown sharp increases.   d. Intervention logic In the agricultural sector EKN works along three lines: (i) Support to joint donor-donor government programmes where possible; (ii) Innovative and institutional strengthening programmes where necessary (including activities in the field of sustainable land management); and (iii) Public Private Partnerships between the Netherlands and Ethiopia where a special relationship exists (horticulture, dairy, oilseeds and the seed sector). EKN has been in the lead in 2006  setting up the RED  FS  Sector Working group. T his  has  turned out to be  a well function ing  g overnment-donor policy dialogue  and implementation structure .  The Sector Working Group has been instrumental in the developm ent of the Agricultural Growth P rogramme and its Investment Framework. Besides, EKN  started in  2006  with the fielding of an Agricultural Cou n sellor  to develop a compreh en sive sup port programme, focussing on PPP’s.  In 2006 the Ethiopia - Netherlan ds Horticulture Partnership  star ted and  in 2008 the  P ublic   p Pr ivat e  P art n ership on  O ilseeds. I n 2009 the Integrated Seed Sector Development  Programme  commenced  and  in 2010  a  d airy  development programme has been  prepared which  will  start  in 2011 . The NICHE programme on  a gri-business and  value-c hain  d evelopment  has  started at four universities  and two Agricultural Colleges (TVETs) are following in 2011 . Finally , a comprehensive knowledge and extension programme on  up scaling   of  AGP-related  evidence-based  practices has been initiated  by EKN .    EKN invest s  appro ximately  25%   of  its yearly budget in  the  Productive Safety Net   Programme  (PNSP) ,  a  multi-donor programme with the ultimate goal of eliminating food dependency for  around 7  million people.   EKN intends to contribute considerably to the AGP, benefitting from its experiences in the PPP’s and other  projects ,  like SNV’s  BOAM  (Business Organisations and Access to Markets)  programme. The  rationale  for this shift  is  the succes s ful agricultural  agenda  initiated by EKN since 2006 . In addition, the  AGP  has created a window of opportunity that can be well complemented by  intensification  in the field of d airy  development  and  support to evidence based  best practices .  The Netherlands  agri( business) sector has proven  to have  a comparative advantage for business and   public private  partnerships in Ethiopia . This strongly  contributes  to increased  institutional  capacity,  agricultural  production and  economic  growth.  As  a crosscutting issue the sustainable land management activities contribute to better land use planning and management of natural resources in specifically important areas of Ethiopia (Central Rift Valley, Gambella,  Bale  Mountains). These areas are crucial for the long term, sustainable use of land and water resources. 2. RESULTS AND LESSONS LEARNED  a. W hat was achieved and why? What made it happen?    The intervention s  have resulted in  an  increase in employment ( e specially in horticulture, employing now more than 50.000 people), more economic  growth,  more foreign ex c hange  income  ( from vege tables, flowers, oilseeds) and  better equipped and able  management  staff in commercial enterprises.  80% of the floriculture farms have successfully  passed the audit  for the Code of Practice , which was developed at the request of  the  G overnment of  E thiopia   and supported by  EKN in the framework of Corporate Social Responsibility. In the  Integrated  Seed  Sector Development  Programme 34  seed cooperative s, involving  more than  3000 farmers, have signi fi cantly improved their  business  model  and  the  quality   and quantity  of seed  produced .  In the framework of  inst itut ional strengt h ening  joint project s have been  implemented  aiming at  improving  the seed legislation ( breeders  rights), pesticide r egulation and management  and  phytosani t a ry regulation .  Improve ment of regulation is  often  combined with capacity building. With  the  help of PSI a wide array of new agri-business es  have started  and/or expanded ,  to mention a few:  a  plant  tissue   lab oratory, a value   chain of process ing  organic sesam e   based on smallholder production  and a passion fruit production and processing company .  I n the  BOAM programme, SNV has been particularly successful in  the honey value chain, linking smallholder produce r s through local processing plants (which also provide technical assistance and improved hives) with the export market.  Exports have gone up from just 300 tons in 2008 to 3000 tons in 2010 to the Middle East  and the EU.  E xport of sesa me  tripled. The PSNP programme has significantly improved food security levels and strengt h ened  the  resilience of millions of livelihoods.  Though graduation numbers are still below target a significant number of households have moved out of the programme to self-resiliency.  The program also contributed to  the  improvement of degraded land s  and infrastructure through public works. The impressive results can b e a scribed to a number of facts ,  but most important ly   is  the political will  of  the  G overnment  o f  E thiopia ,  resulting in a n  ongoing and consistent approach, and  the broad -based donor support through effective  joint d onor  government cooperation .  The relatively favourable w eather  in 2010  also was a positive . b.   What  went less well and why? In the PSNP the number (0 , 3   m il l io n) of  ‘ graduations ’  ( the level when households are declared self-sufficient )  remained below expectations, even with favourable climat ic  conditions.  This can p artly  be  explained by unrealistic prognoses and over - ambitious objectives. The financial support for the program also remained 20% below expectations.  The main r eason for this is  the  financial crisis and to a lesser  exten t  the political context, complicated by accusations of political abuse by  the  G overnment  o f  E thiopia  of Aid (ref. the Human Rights Watch report) .  In the JRIS ( Joint Review of Implementation Support ) the delay and low quality of  reporting  were  perceived as the main constraints in the implementation. There is a serious lack of ( administrative) capacity at  regional as well  as  at the federal level.   The  improvement  in   PSD  environment  is  rather slow . T he effort s to increase the tax revenue form below 10%   to 14 % of GDP by 2015   are  not prudently implemented ,   causing a lot of practical prob lems , such as  very bureaucratic  procedures around import s .  Some issue s have been   re solved with the intervention of  producers  organisations while for a number of structural bottlenecks the  E mbassy facilitated solutions.  c.  What has been learned? The ongoing program me s are proving that considerable change and improve me nts towards food   security and  agricultural  growth  can be made within the present political and economic  context. Donors have become more convinced that Ethiopia is a serious and consistent partner in eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable growth .  ( The GTP objective is to achieve  middle income  status by 2020.)  However ,   donors , including EKN,  have experienced frequently  that Ethiopia is not always an easy partner to work with. Some perceive the st r ong ownersh ip as a blessing, others as a ‘missed opportunity ’. The challenge remains  to  leav e  the  ( strong )  owner ship of  the government  intact,   while at the same time  increas e  synergies and   partnerships.  The described 3-pronged approach aims at balancing these two.    3. RESOURCES SPENT (ODA and FTEs) Dutch ODA disbursed during 2009-2010 as contribution to this strategic goal (approximately)  € 29 mln Average amount of Embassy FTEs allocated during 2009 and 2010 to this goal (for delegated aid) 3 fte Amount of thematic dept FTEs allocated to this goal/ programme during 2009 and 2010 (for non-delegated aid)\ 0 fte Piramide numbers of relevant Activities 18815 and 20775 (PSNP) 21042, 17201, 12409,  4. OVERALL TRAFFIC LIGHT SCORE The overall achievement of results is:  (Please tick  √ )   Off-track    1     In danger to be off track  2    O n track  3 v