 Bijlage 1 Format for  Information Collection   -    Results Report 2009-2010 (bilateral aid program) Embassy :   Maputo Country :   Mozambique Strategic Goal : Contribute to poverty reduction in Mozambique  in an aligned  and effective  way   Sub-goal/ programme selected for this form :   Improved social protection for HIV/AIDS victims, with a focus on strengthening the cash transfer program managed by the Ministry of Women and Social Action (MMAS) and on   clearing the backlog in birth registration .     This form is c ompleted by :   Eleásara Antunes Max 1200 words .  1. CONTEXT  a. Country context Graph  1 : Poverty distribution by sex The  number of people living below the poverty line has stagnated at 54% between 2003 and 2009 , poverty line is estimated at 18.4 Mts  (USD 0 , 69 )  (IOF 2008/2009 ) ,   with a significant share of the burden for women.    Inequality is  also   increasing;  the national Gini coefficient is 0.414  with  significant rural/urban variations, ranging from 0.323 in Tete province and 0.512 in Maputo city.     On the other hand, non income related indicators have shown signs of progress since 2003, such as the access to education ,  health  and water ,  whereas,  child malnutrition  and stunting related indicators  have shown very small improvements.   T he Human development index for Mozambique is 0.284, which places Mozambique below the SSA region average which is 0.389. Nonetheless, the performance of the national  economy  has been very good, growing at a rate of  7.8 % a year in the last  3  years , while the average rate for the other souther n  African countries was 4.8% ,  however  with very little impact in poor households .   b.  Sector (or thematic) context One of the priorities defined in the  National Action Plan for Poverty Reduction (PARPA II)  is  income redistribution , t h rough the provision  of  welfare related services to the poorest households.   T he  s ocial protection strategy approved in 2010  h as the aim to: (i)  i ncrease the coverage and the impact of the programs directed to the most vulnerable people; (ii)  i ncrease the efficiency of the social protection program; and (iii)  e nsure harmonisation and coordination of the different existing social protection programs .   Mozambique’s  cash transfer program,   Programa de Subsídio   de  Aliment os  ( PSA_ Food Subsidy Programme),   was  established by decree on 25 August 1993,  The program aims to provide direct assistance to individuals permanently unable to work  in orde r  to  create minimum conditions for survival and of access to satisfy the basic needs of target groups in absolute poverty .    Poverty is also exacerbated by  poor  access to basic services and benefits, such as social protection .  Lack of adequate identification is a very big obstacle particularly for vulnerable and orphaned children, as they cannot be enrolled at school or in the PSA as indirect beneficiaries.  In order to overcome the lack of identification documents,   GoM  designed  a campaign  to provide registration services at community level.   This initiative is financed by the Netherlands Embassy  since 2006.   c. Description of the problem The  economic  strategy adopted by the Mozambican government has been successful in  reaching sustained  economic growth. However the impact of this economic growth has not been significant in terms of reducing the number of people below the poverty line. Social protection  policies   and programs aim to  reduce  household’s  risks and vulnerabilities increasing their opportunities to fully engage in the economy.  d. Intervention logic As the  coordination of the social protection response is mainly the remit of MMAS, the Embassy has chosen to support this  ministry to  improve their implementation capacity;  the Embassy also supported and some civil society partners to reinforce the system: The embassy has supported Help Age International to implement an alternative model to deliver the transfer to the beneficiaries; Support to UNICEF to reduce the number of children without identification , trough the birth registration campaign .   2. RESULTS AND LESSONS LEARNED  What was achieved and why?  What made it happen?  (Please base on your results chain / other intervention logic  and please include gender aspects where relevant ) For the Cash transfer program the following changes have occurred: Long term additional funding to the program has prompted a rapid expansion, a double fold increase in the number of beneficiaries from 2007 to 2010  (217.000  beneficiaries ) , around 70% of the  beneficiaries  are elder women .  This significantly contributed for the design and approval of  the regulatory framework for the Basic Social Protection sub System (November 2009), and the approval of the National  strategy for   B asic Social  P rotection (March 2010).  The impact evaluation study of PSA  reflects that the programme has had  a positive   benefits  on food share expenditure  of the households , particularly for female headed households. It also shows that meal regularity, one of the dimensions of food security, has also been positively affected, at least for adult women and boys. It was also found a weak evidence of positive impact on nutrition outcomes for children below the age of 5.  It  is important to highlight that  this trend is verified  even with the very small amount   of the transfer   ( average 11 0Mts per month which is equivalent to US $3) , which is less than the amount in similar countries  (Zambia US$  5  monthly, Kenya US $21 and Malawi on average US $14) .   Figure  1 : PSA Payments in Dondo District, Sofala province . Images kindly provided by INAS. The financing of the Birth registration campaign allowed the Ministry of justice to achieve the following results: a second place award was granted to the M ozambican National Directorate of Registry and Notary  (DNRN) . The African Association of Public  Administration Management  (AAPAM)  attribut ed  the prize for the innovative approach  adopted by DNRN ,  the  use of mobile brigades in delivering  registration  services.  S ince 2006, the birth registration program has registered some  6.000.000  children  under 18 , . Significant increase of the number of children with a birth certificate.  In Mozambique, the proportion of children  under five  whose birth was registered is 31% (MICS 2008)  and  the 2007 census shows that the percentage of registered children , under 18  as  49%   .  The situation has  remarkably  improved when compared with the 2004 DHS figures, where only 8% of children under five were  registered.  Strengthening of inter-ministerial cooperation between the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Women and Social Action and the Ministry of State Administration which is sought to increase birth registration rates, especially at birth. Modernisation of the Birth registration process. Graph  2 :   Children under 18, birth registration data ,  Source: MICS  and Census 2007  report   . What went less well and why? Social protection was not considered by  The Government has  one of the countries’ poverty reduction strategy. To illustrate this, in 2009 and 2010 when fuel and food prices increased government put in place subsidies which are very costly and fiscally not sustainable.  And  above all, it  had smaller impact on the poorest households.   A least costly alternative could have been the increase  of  the scale of the cash transfer program, for instance.   Nonetheless , it is important to mention that since the end of 2010 the government is getting aware of the relevance of social protection policies. What has been learned? MMAS and INAS must be able to use evidence in order to influence policy, especially to support dialogue for the finance of social protection.  It is important to have all donors working in the field of social protection to speak with one voice, this reinforces the position of MMAs as a coordinating institution and strengthens the message that call attention for the need to better invest in social protection.     3. RESOURCES SPENT (ODA and FTEs) Dutch ODA disbursed during 2009-2010 as contribution to this strategic goal  (approximately)   €  6.500.000 Average a mount of Embassy FTEs allocated  during 2009 and 2010  to this goal (for delegated aid)   0.6 5 Piramide numbers of relevant Activities 17224 15382 18208 4. OVERALL TRAFFIC LIGHT SCORE T he  overall  achievement of results is :  ( Please tick   √ )   Off-track    1     I n danger to be off track  2     O n track  3