 Format for  Information Collection   -    Results Report 2009-2010 (bilateral aid program)   EDUCATION. Amended version March 17, 2011 Embassy (for delegated aid ):  Kigali T hematic Department  (for non-delegated aid) : - Country :  Rwanda Strategic Goal : Pro-poor sustained economic growth Sub-goal/ programme selected for this form (where relevant) : Education and Technical and Vocational Education Training This form is c ompleted by :  Deo Musabyimana 1. CONTEXT  a. Country  or regional  context In the  E conomic  D evelopment and  P overty  R eduction  S trategy  (EDPRS)  document, Rwanda  puts an  emphasis on promoting  skills development . Rwanda ’s  goal is   to promote  a knowledge based economy  and to become  a  middle income country by 2020 . Education is considered to be one of the ways to achieve  t his ambition .   b. Sector (or thematic) context The Ministry of Education in collaboration with the development part ners ( particularly DFID ,  the lead  donor )   completed in July 2010 the  E ducation Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) covering the period from 2010 to 2015. This document is a result of intensive consultations involving the Ministry, the districts administration, schools and NGOs.  The plan integrates the recent introduction  and fast tracking  of the 9 Ye ar Basic Education in an attempt to improve the quality in education.  T he plan put s an emphasis on developing  upper  secondary education  and invest more in Technical and Vocational E ducation Training(TVET). These  aspects  will take into account the employability skills in response  to a more and more demanding labour market.  For more information on strategic areas in education  and skills development, please  visit  www.mineduc.gov.rw c. Description of the problem The ambition set by  the  Rwandan Government to be a knowledge based economy an d a middle income country by 202 0 can not be achieved without investments in skills. With a  very  young population and withou t substantial natural resources,  the country needs to develop the capacity o f its  people to be able to comp ete in  the  domestic, regional and global economy. On the Government Common Performance Assessment Framework (CPAF) the satisfaction of employers  on  TVET graduates is mentionned as one of the key indicators.  A n employers’survey conducted   in 2010  with a sample of more than 60 companies showed that  the TVET system in Rwanda needs to be consulted and aligned to the occupations in industry. d. Intervention logic EKN gives Sector Budget Support (through DFID) and also developed programs in Technical and Vocational Training (TVET).  The TVET programs are part of our private sector development program, as lack of skills is one of the main impediments to private sector development. 2. RESULTS AND LESSONS LEARNED  What was achieved and why?  What made it happen?  With an average annual disbursement of 8 mln Euro, the Netherlands are amongst the main contributors to the  e ducation sector, including TVET . Sector Budget Support  Education Taking into account the harmonization and coordination agenda, EKN  entered  into  a silent partnership with DFID to support the Education Sector Budget. EKN disbursed  yearly around 6 million   Euro  to  support  in particular  basic education. Progress in the education sector is measured through several indicators  that are part of the CPAF .  The main results in the period in which we have given budget support are: In formal and informal meetings with DFID and in the fora where educat ion is discussed the EKN has  strongly advocated for the improvement of the  comple tion rate.  With the introduction and fast tracking of the 9 year basic education   the completion rate  r ecorded a big leap  forward  from 52 % in 2008 up  to 7 6%  in 2010   ( g irls rate is higher being 79.8% against 71.4 % for boys)   The  Primary net enrolment rate increased from 93 %  in 2009  to 95 %  in 2010  (the rate of girls is higher being 97   against 94  for boys)  Transition rate from primary to secondary  increased from 88 % in 2008 to 95 % in 2009 . The promotion rate in primary education increased from 69.5 % in 2008 to 73.8 % in 2009 meaning a decrease in the repetition and dropout rates  of  respectively 14 % and 12.2 %. TVET and Skills Development   Although  EKN   was considered to be a silent partner in  the E ducation  Sector Budget S upport,  EKN   play ed  a comple menta r y role  to  DFID  in the education cluster  regarding  the  institutional set up and  the  budget planning of  TVET .  More specifically,  on the budget side  EKN lobbied to have the TVET budget increased,  from 2% in 2008 to  now  6 %  in the new ESSP (2010 –  2015).  Furthermore  a  TVET authority ,   the Workf orce Development Authority (WDA)  was put in p lace  by using  the Netherlands Initiative for Capacity Building in Higher Education  in close cooperation between EKN and  Nuffic .  WDA is in an  innovative process  that  put s  in place   a  TVET Qualification framework that did not exist  before. . EKN  was  also  active in lob b ying to have  the  TVET  training responsive to the needs of the labour market.  Th is applies in particular to   the  internship and entrepreneurship culture  which  is still poor in local TVET schools. EKN in partnership with  t he Private Sector Federation  (PSF)  are making e fforts  to foster this culture  in Rwanda.  More than 1.000 businesses  (some run by TVET graduates)   have since  participated in the Business Plan Competition and  thousands of  interns  are  targetted for exposure  to the work place  for a duration of 6 months and a certificate at the end .  10 % of the 1.000 businesses  involved  were connected to banks to  facilitate  loans.  PSF in collaboration of the Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Education have drafted a national internship framework. What went less well and why? The Rwandan Government has a strong leadership and ownership in the context of harmonization and coordination. It is leading now the process of the  D ivision of  L abour  (DoL)  among development partners and some sectors will loose their traditional supporters.  Education is among those sectors. Even if the Government trusts that the portion of national budget going to that sector will be kept high, in the last Joint Budget Support Review (JBSR) some development partners including DFID s tated  that  the withdrawal of some  budget supporters may endanger  medium term predictability and future funds for the sector. A  study o n  the  effect of the  withdrawal  of multiple actors in the secotr   was recommended in that JBSR and  is foreseen in 2011 .   The Netherlands was supposed  to take the lead in coordinating the sub-sector of TVET but  was not able to repond to this request  due to th is  DoL . The involvement of the private sector in training program m es ,  planning and execution proves to be challenging. Company managers do not have much time to spend in policy discussion and it will require a strong communication strategy (focusing on a win - win partnership) to convince them of their  possible and complementary  role in education and skills development. Despite significant efforts, different aid modalities by donors  active  in the area of TVET make it difficult to agree on a  shared  and costed strategy that guides all interventions in the sub-sector. What has been learned? The Government of Rwanda has made tremendous achievements in basic education. The completion rate has dramatically increased  and the  subsequent education  levels including secondary education and TVET wi ll have to  absorb the increased nrs of students.  A n  employers’survey showed that in Rwand a  there is a need  to revisit the TVET system and better align it with  the needs of the labour market .  EKN should be more active in  that process taking into account the  comparative advantages it has  already  achieved  in  the  lobby and ad vocacy  that it has undertaken.to further adept training modules to the needs of the labour market. 3. RESOURCES SPENT (ODA and FTEs) Dutch ODA disbursed during 2009-2010 as contribution to this strategic goal  (approximately)   €  16  mln   (total of  20 09 and 20 10 ) Average a mount of Embassy FTEs allocated  during 2009 and 2010  to this goal (for delegated aid)   1 FTE Amount of thematic dept FTEs allocated to th is  goal / programme   during 2009 and 2010  (for non-delegated aid) \ Piramide numbers of relevant Activities SBS: act. 16124 PSF: act. 19815 GTZ: act. 19160 4. OVERALL TRAFFIC LIGHT SCORE T he  overall  achievement of results is :  ( Please tick   √ )   Off-track    1     I n danger to be off track  2     O n track  3 √