 Results  Governance Zambia 2009-2010 Embassy:  Lusaka Country:  Zambia Strategic Goal:   To promote a democratic, just, transparent and accountable Zambian society Sub-goal selected for this form:   To effectively and efficiently manage free and fair elections   This form is completed by:   Joost van Ettro Context Country  and sector  context Zambia prides itself for being a stable and peaceful country, amidst other countries that have known (civil) war. From independence until 1991, it was ruled by UNIP, under President Kaunda. In 1991, as in many other countries worldwide, the one-party rule came to an end and the first multiparty elections  were held  since  1968.  Since 1991 5 presidential elections have been held, all in a peaceful and reasonable transparent manner, the  latest  being in 2008 after the unexpected death of President Mwanawasa.  Presidential  and  Parliamentary elections  will take place in 2011.  Quickly after the 2008 elections, Zambian politicians started positioning themselves for the  next  elections of 2011.  Description of the problem In accorda nce with the constitution, the  elections in 2008 had to be held  within  90 days after the death of President Mwanawasa, leaving little time for proper preparations. Zambia has a system of double registration of voters, requiring people to have an ID card and a voter card to be allowed to vote . It was impossible to update the  voters list  in these 90 days, forcing the Electoral Commission of Zambia to conduct the elections with the  voters  role of 2006. It is estimated that  therefore  300.000 people  could not register to vote , while the difference between the winner and runner - up was only  3 5 . 209  votes.   M onitors   had also  other concerns o n the process ,  such as  the need to improve the regulatory framework of the  media  (which in turn should lead to equal and neutral coverage of all parties in the press),  the low participation of women as candidates,  the slowness of tabulating and transmitting results and the need to consolidate and  simplify  the legal instruments related to elections.   As 2011 would be the next elections year, it was widely agreed a comprehensive approach was needed  and could be used in the run up to that election.   It was agreed that continuous voter registration,  allowing  people to register at any moment, would be part of the solution. This is only possible if Zambia moves form a paper-based registration to a digital database.  Intervention logic Given the  variety of issues that have to be address ed  to create better guarantees for free and fair elections  and the  sensitive nature of supporting electoral processes, various donors have put their collective resources in a  UN-led  trust fund  that  supports the ECZ, political parties, NGOs  and media. The first priority wa s updating the  voters roll , while at the same time  reducing possibilities  for  fraud . Different teams toured the country with laptops,  equipped  with digital camera’s and finger print  scan ner s, to capture as many new voters or replacing lost  voters cards .  ECZ and  NGOs  infor m ed  the public of when and where they could be registered and appealed peop le to take  the effort to do so. At the same time media were informed of the changes in the procedures, but also trained in their role of independent reporters who should neutrally inform the public. Political parties and NGOs were brought together to think through why women did  not  stand as candidates.   This  inclusive and comprehensive  approach should  help en su re that no  stakeholder  is left out and  that  each stakeholder can  contribute to better elections in 2011   on the basis of his specific interest and expertise .  Results and lessons learned What  was achieve d and why? What made it happen? The percentage of registered voters is slightly higher than in 2008, close to 75%. The biggest progress  was  made when both departments involved in registr a tion, the one that issues ID’s and ECZ that  issues  voters cards , started  offering joint services  to the   people, so that people could conclude all formalities  in one go .  Political parties, NGOs and other stakeholders worked together to modify the Electoral Code of Conduct  (ECC) , that governs the behaviour of political parties, media and all others involved in the way elections are held. The  proposed amendments to the ECC   are  currently being debated in parliament, with input  from  NGOS and media. It is no longer a document only owned by the politicians.   What went less well and why? Although  more voters  are registered, it is unlikely Zambia  will have  reached it s  proclai med  goal  of  having  80% of all  eligible  voters registered. Especially in the beginning of the registration exercise, people did not know where they could register. Due to a lack of coordination not all interested persons could get an ID before trying to register as a voter.  P olitical parties have not shown much interest to improve internal democracy, to start issue-based campaigning or selecting more women to stand for positions.  Traditionally that is not how parties in Zambia are run and changing the  way they do their  business has  proven to be difficult. Parties are organised around leaders, not issues.  When leaders leave, their  supporters  will follow, even to other parties . Media reforms have proven to be equally  difficult. The  vested interests of the government to use state owned media, and those of the private owners of other media who  equally  have their political agenda’s, limit the space for willing journalists to report on all candidates.  Journalism is overall of a very descriptive nature: there is not yet a tradition of investigative journalism. Women so far have not  demonstrated a greater willingness  to stand as candidates. This is explained  in general terms  by  a  society in which women  in general  face constraints that prevent them from participating equitably in many spheres of life.   Women’s still limited role and position in politics seems to be more specifically the result of the  absence of a clear strategy and action plan to increase the percentage of women in parliament, even thou gh  Zambia subscribed to the SADC  50 percent target for representation of women in political and decision-making positions at all levels .  The  political scene is  very much the domain of men , with  sometimes  crude  threats  to women .  The Embassy had the ambition to set up a joint donor programme supporting  the development and improvement of the elections.  To a certain extend this has been achieved, but, the programme did not succeed in improving the legal framework governing the elections well in time before the elections actually  would  take place.  We are now faced with a situation that major changes, including the  creation  of extra constituencies, the introduction of proportional representation for a limited number of seats are still being discussed a few months before the elections. It is possible that such fundamental changes will be made just before the people get the chance to vote.  What has been learned? The regist r ation exercise was costly and cumbersome, but should be continued each year, even when no elections are  imminent .  Only then,  and  only when it is done in coordination between both  involved  government institutions and NGOs, with sufficient  outreach to the public , can the ambitio n of  real  continuous   registration  be  achieved. That will also greatly reduce the allegations of political biased registration.  As elections are often seen as the highlight of a democratic process, many donors will be willing to offer support in the immediate run-up. However, more can be done just after elections, in a relatively quiet period to prepare for the next elections. Voter registration just before el e ctions will be perceived by some as an option for rigging, would the  registration  be ongoing from the first day after elections, this process is better protected from  accusations or abuse. The same holds true for reforms connected to elections.  The new constitution will, when adopt ed , oblige parties to have women in at least 30% of all elected positions,  including   parliament, forcing parties to select more women as candidates.   Achievement of the target  will  also be made possible by the  introduction of a limited  number  of seats to be allocated on the basis of proportional representation .  The quality of the media and fairness of their reporting will depend on the willingness of the owners to allow media to play such a role. It is unlikely that there will be a significant change in their position.  It equally depends on how Zambia will progress with the  delicate  issue of media  regulation , where government is currently favouring statutory regulation over self-regulation  but is in dialogue with the media on a solution that is acceptable for all.  Resources spent Dutch ODA disbursed during 2009-2010 USD 400.000,= Average amount Embassy FTEs allocated 0. 2 Piramide numbers of relevant activities 20202 Overall Traffic Light Score The overall achievement of results is: on track